---
layout: clrs-solution
title:  "Problem 2-1"
subtitle: "Insertion sort on small arrays in merge sort"
---
>Although merge sort runs in $$\Theta(n \lg n)$$ worst-case time and insertion sort runs in $$\Theta(n^2)$$ worst-case time, the constant factors in insertion sort can make it faster in practice for small problem sizes on many machines. Thus, it makes sense to ***coarsen*** the leaves of the recursion by using insertion sort within merge sort when subproblems become sufficiently small. Consider a modification to merge sort in which $$\frac{n}{k}$$ sublists of length $$k$$ are sorted using insertion sort and then merged using the standard merging mechanism, where $$k$$ is a value to be determined.

>***a.*** Show that insertion sort can sort the $$\frac{n}{k}$$ sublists, each of length $$k$$, in $$\Theta(nk)$$ worst-case time.

Sorting a sublist of length $$k$$ takes $$\Theta(k^2)$$, so sorting $$\frac{n}{k}$$ such sublists takes $$\Theta (\frac{n}{k}k^2) = \Theta(nk)$$ worst-case time.

>***b.*** Show how to merge the sublists in $$\Theta(n \lg(\frac{n}{k}))$$ worst-case time.

The MERGE procedure takes $$\Theta(n)$$ time, and we must merge 2 sublists at a time which takes $$\Theta(\lg(\frac{n}{k}))$$ time. Altogether, this will take $$\Theta(n \lg \frac{n}{k})$$ worst-case time.

>***c.*** Given that the modified algorith runs in $$\Theta(nk + n \lg \frac{n}{k}))$$ worst-case time, what is the largest value of $$k$$ as a function of $$n$$ for which the modified algorithm has the same running time as standard merge sort, in terms of $$\Theta$$-notation?

Suppose $$k = \lg n$$. Then we have $$nk + n \lg \frac{n}{k} = n \lg n + n(\lg n - \lg(\lg{n}))$$ which represents the same running time as a standard merge sort: $$\Theta (n \lg n)$$. If $$k$$ were a larger function of $$n$$, the front term of $$nk$$ would result in a greater running time. 

>***d.*** How should we choose $$k$$ in practice?

Our chosen value for $$k$$ should be the largest value in which running INSERTION-SORT on a list of length $$k$$ takes less time than running MERGE-SORT on the same list. See [Exercise 1.2-2](/CLRS/solutions/01/e1.2-2).