---
layout: clrs-solution
title:  "Problem 2-3"
subtitle: "Correctness of Horner's rule"
---
>The following code fragment implements Horner's rule for evaluating a polynomial
>
>$$\begin{align*}
P(x) &= \sum\limits_{k=0}^{n} \\
&= a_0 + x(a_1 + \cdots + x(a_{n-1} + xa_n) \cdots)) \\
\end{align*}
$$
> 
> given the coefficients $$a_0, a_1,...,a_n$$ and a value for x:
>
>1 `y = 0`
>
>2 `for i = n downto 0`
>
>3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; `y = aᵢ + x · y`

>***a.*** In terms of $$\Theta$$-notation, what is the running time of this code fragment for Horner's rule?

$$\Theta (n)$$. All we are doing is performing the action on line 3 $$n$$ times.

>***b.*** Write pseudocode to implement the naive polynomail-evaluation algorithm that computes each term of the polynomial from scratch. What is the running time of this algorithm? How does it compare to Horner's rule?

1 `y = 0`

2 `for i = 0 to n`

3 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; `term = aᵢ`

4 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; `for j = 1 to i`

5 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; `term = term · x`

6 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; `y = y + term`

This algorithm runs at $$\Theta (n^2)$$ due to the nested loop. It is not as efficient as Horner's rule.

>***c.*** Consider the following loop invariant:
>
>At the start of each iteration of the **for** loop of lines 2-3,
>
>$$y = \sum\limits_{k=0}^{n-(i+1)}a_{k+i+1}x^k$$.
>
>Interpret a summation with no terms as equaling 0. Following the structure of the loop invariant proof presented in this chapter, use this loop invariant to show that, at termination, $$y=\sum_{k=0}^{n}a_kx^k$$.

**Inititialization**: Before the first loop iteration, the summation has no terms, and so (trivially) $$y = 0$$.

**Maintenance**: After the loop iterates, we have $$y' = a_i + x · y$$. Since $$i$$ is decrementing, $$y' = \sum\limits_{k=0}^{n-i}a_{k+i}x^k$$ and based on the loop invariant, $$y = \sum\limits_{k=0}^{n-(i+1)}a_{k+i+1}x^k$$. So we have:

$$\begin{align*}
y' &= a_i + x · y \\
\sum\limits_{k=0}^{n-i}a_{k+i}x^k &= a_i + x · \sum\limits_{k=0}^{n-(i+1)}a_{k+i+1}x^k \\
\sum\limits_{k=0}^{n-i}a_{k+i}x^k &= a_ix^0 + \sum\limits_{k=0}^{n-(i+1)}a_{k+i+1}x^k+1 \\
\sum\limits_{k=0}^{n-i}a_{k+i}x^k &= a_ix^0 + \sum\limits_{k=1}^{n-i}a_{k+i}x^k \\
\sum\limits_{k=0}^{n-i}a_{k+i}x^k &= \sum\limits_{k=0}^{n-i}a_{k+i}x^k \\
\end{align*}
$$

The trickiness going on here is modifying the summation's bottom term from $$k = 0$$ to $$k = 1$$ which results in subtracting one from each use of the term $$k$$ to keep equality. By doing this, we are then able to slide our new term $$a_ix^0$$ into the summation to then return the starting $$k$$ value back to $$0$$. Ultimately this shows that the loop invariant holds after each iteration of the loop.

**Termination**: The loop terminates when $$i = -1$$ at which point we have:

$$\begin{align*}
y &= \sum\limits_{k=0}^{n-(i+1)}a_{k+i+1}x^k \\
&= \sum\limits_{k=0}^{n-(-1 + 1)}a_{k - 1 + 1}x^k \\
&= \sum\limits_{k=0}^{n}a_{k}x^k\\
\end{align*}
$$

>***d.*** Conclude by arguing that the given code fragment correctly evaluates a polynomial charaterized by the coefficients $$a_0,a_1,...,.a_n$$.

As proven above in ***c***, Horner's Rule is a correct algorithm that evaluates the given polynomial at termination. 