---
layout: clrs-solution
title:  "Problem 2-4"
subtitle: "Inversions"
---
>Let $$A[1..n]$$ be an array of $$n$$ distinct numbers. If $$i < j$$ and $$A[i] > A[j]$$, then the pair $$(i, j)$$ is called an ***inversion*** of $$A$$.

>***a.*** List the five inversions of the array $$\{2, 3, 8, 6, 1\}$$.

$$(1, 5), (2, 5), (3, 4), (3, 5), (4, 5)$$

>***b.*** What array with elements from the set $$\{1, 2,...,n\}$$ has the most inversions? How many does it have?

The array $$\{n, n-1,...,1\}$$ has $$\sum\limits_{i=1}^{n-1}n$$ inversions.

>***c.*** What is the relationship between the running time of insertion sort and the number of inversions in the input array? Justify your answer.

Considering INSERTION-SORT as presented on page 26, the actions within the **while** loop on lines 5-7 will be taken a number of times equal to the amount of inversions in the input array $$A$$. This means that the number of inversions is a constant factor of the running time of INSERITON-SORT.

>***d.*** Give an algorithm that determines the number of inversions in any permutation on $$n$$ elements in $$\Theta(n \lg n ) worst-case time. (*Hint*: Modify merge sort.)

Modify the MERGE procedure to count inversions every time we select a value from the $$R$$ array. Selecting a value from the $$R$$ array indicates that all remaining values in the $$L$$ array are greater than our selected value thus each element in the $$L$$ array at the time of selection represents an inversion. Since the overall size of $$L$$ is $$n₁$$, and the position of the currently 'showing' value on the $$L$$ array is $$i$$, the number of remaining elements at the time of selection is $$n₁ - i + 1$$. Lines 16 and 23 of INVERSION-MERGE below represent the points where we select a value from the $$R$$ array, and so that is where we record our inversion counts.

INVERSION-MERGE(A, p, q, r)

01 `n₁ = q - p + 1`

02 `n₂ = r - q`

03 `Let L[1 . . n₁] and R[1 . . n₂] be new arrays`

04 `for i = 1 to n₁`

05 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; `L[i] = A[p + i - 1]`

06 `for j = 1 to n₂`

07 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; `R[j] = A[q + j]`

08 `i = 1`

09 `j = 1`

10 `for k = p to r`

11 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; `if j > n₂`

12 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; `A[k] = L[i]`

13 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; `i = i + 1`

14 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; `else if if i > n₁`

15 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; `A[k] = R[j]`

16 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; `inversions += n₁ - i + 1`

17 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; `j = j + 1`

18 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; `else if L[i] ≤ R[j]`

19 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; `A[k] = L[i]`

20 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; `i = i + 1`

21 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; `else`

22 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; `A[k] = R[j]`

23 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; `inversions += n₁ - i + 1` 

24 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; `j = j + 1`