---
layout: clrs-solution
title:  "Problem 3-2"
subtitle: "Relative asymptotic growths"
---
>Indicate, for each pair of expressions $$(A,B)$$ in the table below, whether $$A$$ is $$O$$, $$o$$, $$\Omega$$, $$\omega$$, or $$\Theta$$ of $$B$$. Assume that $$k \geq 1$$, $$\epsilon > 0$$, and $$c > 1$$ are constants.

$$\newcommand\T{\Rule{0pt}{1em}{.3em}}
\begin{array}{|c|c|c|c|c|c|c|c|}
\hline & A & B & O & o & \Omega & \omega & \Theta \\ \hline
\textbf{a.} \T & \lg^k n \T & n^\epsilon \T & \textrm{Yes} \T & \textrm{Yes} \T & \textrm{No} \T & \textrm{No} \T & \textrm{No} \\ \hline
\textbf{b.} \T & n^k \T & c^n \T & \textrm{Yes} \T & \textrm{Yes} \T & \textrm{No} \T & \textrm{No} \T & \textrm{No} \\ \hline
\textbf{c.} \T & \sqrt{n} \T & n^{\sin n} & \textrm{No} & \textrm{No} & \textrm{No} & \textrm{No} & \textrm{No} \\ \hline
\textbf{d.} \T & 2^n \T & 2^{\frac{n}{2}} \T & \textrm{No} & \textrm{No} & \textrm{Yes} & \textrm{Yes} & \textrm{No} \\ \hline
\textbf{e.} \T & n^{\lg c} \T & c^{\lg n} \T & \textrm{Yes} & \textrm{No} & \textrm{Yes} & \textrm{No} & \textrm{Yes} \\ \hline
\textbf{f.} \T & \lg{n!} \T & \lg{n^n} \T & \textrm{Yes} & \textrm{No} & \textrm{Yes} & \textrm{No} & \textrm{Yes} \\ \hline
\end{array}$$

I have included informal discussions of how I reached the answers in this table.

***a.*** Note that $$\lg^kn = (\lg n)^k$$. Intuitively, because both $$k$$ and $$\epsilon$$ are constants, it must be the case that $$B$$ is a strong upper bound of $$A$$.

***b.*** $$A$$ is a variable to a constant power while $$B$$ is a constant to a variable power. It is immediately clear that $$B$$ represents a strong upper bound of $$A$$.

***c.*** $$A$$ slowly but steadily increases while $$B$$ actually oscilates between $$n^{-1}$$ and $$n^{1}$$ which means $$A$$ is not asymptotically bound by $$B$$ at all.

***d.*** $$B$$ intuitively represents the same function as $$A$$ with a lower exponent, therefore it represents a strong lower bound of $$A$$.

***e.*** Based on the identity $$a^{\log_bc} = c^{\log_ba}$$ these two functions are asymptotically equivalent.

***f.*** This one threw me for a loop because intuitively it really seems like $$B$$ grows much faster than $$A$$ when in fact they are asymptotically equivalent. Consider the identity $$\lg(n!) = \Theta(n \lg n)$$ alongside our ability to manipulate $$\lg(n^n) = n \lg n = \Theta(n \lg n)$$. I went so far as to graph the two equations to see that while $$B$$ is always larger than $$A$$, it grows at an identical rate. Fascinating.