---
layout: clrs-solution
title:  "Problem 4-2"
subtitle: "Parameter-passing costs"
---
>Throughout this book, we assume that parameter passing during procedure calls takes constant time, even if an $$N$$-element array is being passed. This assumption is valid in most systems because a pointer to the array is passed, not the array itself. This problem examines the implications of three parameter-passing strategies:
>
>**1.** An array is passed by pointer. Time = $$\Theta(1)$$.
>
>**2.** An array is passed by copying. Time = $$\Theta(N)$$, where $$N$$ is the size of the array.
>
>**3.** An array is passed by copying only the subrange that might be accessed by the called procedure. Time = $$\Theta(q-1)$$ if the subarray $$A[p ... q]$$ is passed.
>
>***a.*** Consider the recursive binary search algorithm for finding a number in a sorted array (see Excercise 2.3-5). Give recurrences for the worst-case running times of binary search when arrays are passed using each of the three methods above, and give good upper bounds on the solutions of the recurrences. Let $$N$$ be the size of the original problem and $$n$$ be the size of a subproblem.

**1.** $$T(n) = T(n/2) + \Theta(1) \implies a = 1, b = 2$$ and $$f(n) = 1$$. We can use case 2 of the master method because $$f(n) = \Theta(n^{\log_2 1}) = \Theta(0)$$, and thus the solution to the recurrence is $$T(n) = \Theta((n^{\log_2 1}) \lg n) = \Theta(\lg n)$$.

**2.** 

$$\begin{split}
T(n) & = T(n/2) + \Theta(N) \\
& = T(n/4) + 2 \Theta(N) \\
& = T(n/8) + 3 \Theta(N) \\
& = \sum\limits_{i=0}^{\lg{n-1}}((i+1)\Theta(N)/2^i) \\
& = \Theta(N) \lg N \\
& = \Theta(N \lg N) \\
\end{split}$$

**3.** $$T(N) = 2T(N/2) + \Theta(N) \implies a = 1, b = 2$$ and $$f(N) = N$$. We can use case 3 of the master method because $$f(N) = \Omega(N^{\log_2 1 + \epsilon}) \implies \epsilon = 1 > 0$$ and

$$\begin{split}
af(N/b) && \leq cf(N) \\
(N/2) && \leq cN \\
\end{split}$$

holds for $$\frac{1}{2} \leq c < 1$$. Thus the solution to the recurrence is $$T(N) = \Theta(f(N)) = \Theta(N)$$.

>***b.*** Redo part (a) for the MERGE-SORT algorithm from Section 2.3.1.

**1.** $$T(n) = 2T(n/2) + \Theta(1) \implies a = 2, b = 2$$ and $$f(n) = 1$$. We can use case 2 of the master method because $$f(n) = \Theta(n^{\log_b a }) = \Theta(n^{\log_2 2 }) = \Theta(1)$$, and thus the solution to the recurrence is $$T(n) = \Theta(n^{\log_b a} \lg n) = \Theta(n \lg n)$$.

**2.**

$$\begin{split}
T(n) &= 2T(n/2) + cn + 2\Theta(N) \\
&= 4T(n/4) + 2cn + 4\Theta(N) \\
&= 8T(n/8) + 3cn + 8\Theta(N) \\
&= \sum\limits_{i=0}^{\lg{n-1}} (i+1)cn + N\sum\limits_{i=0}^{\lg{n-1}}2^i \\
&= cn \lg n + N \frac{2^{\lg n} - 1}{2 - 1} \\
&= cn \lg n + nN - N \\
&= \Theta(nN) \\
&= \Theta(N^2) \\
\end{split}$$

**3.** $$T(N) = 2T(n/2) + cn + 2n/2 = 2T(n/2) + (c+1)n$$. This is the same recurrence as in part **1**, thus the solution is $$\Theta(n \lg n)$$.