---
layout: clrs-solution
title:  "Problem 4-6"
subtitle: "Monge arrays"
---
>An $$m \times n$$ array $$A$$ of real numbers is a ***Monge array*** if for all $$i$$, $$j$$, $$k$$, and $$l$$ such that $$1 \leq i < k \leq m$$ and $$1 \leq j < l \leq n$$, we have
>
>$$A[i, j] + A[k, l] \leq A[i, l] + A[k, j]$$.
>
>In other words, whenever we pick two rows and two columns of a Monge array and consider the four elements at the intersections of the rows and the columns, the sum of the upper-left and lower-right elements is less than or equal to the sum of the lower-left and upper-right elements. For example, the following array is Monge:
>
>$$\begin{array}{c c c c c}
10 & 17 & 13 & 28 & 23 \\
17 & 22 & 16 & 29 & 23 \\
24 & 28 & 22 & 34 & 24 \\
11 & 13 & 6 & 17 & 7 \\
45 & 44 & 32 & 37 & 23 \\
36 & 33 & 19 & 21 & 6 \\
75 & 66 & 51 & 53 & 34 \\
\end{array}$$
>
>***a.*** Prove that an array is Monge if and only if for all $$i = 1, 2, \ldots, m - 1$$ and $$j = 1, 2, \ldots, n - 1$$, we have
>
>$$A[i, j] + A[i + 1, j + 1] \leq A[i, j + 1] + A[i + 1, j]$$.
>
>(*Hint:* For the "if" part, use inductions separately on rows and columns.)

First of all, the "only if" part of this statement is already implied by the definition of a Monge array. For the "if" part we will use induction to show that 

$$A[i, j] + A[i + 1, j + 1] \leq A[i, j + 1] + A[i + 1, j] \implies A[i, j] + A[k, j + 1] \leq A[i, j + 1] + A[k, j]$$

where $$i < k$$. The base case of $$k = i + 1$$ is given. Next by assuming that this holds for $$k = 1 + n$$ we must prove that it also holds for $$k + 1 = i + n - 1$$. Combining these two gives us:

$$\begin{split}
A[i, j] + A[k, j+1] + A[k, j] + A[k+1, j+1] & \leq A[i, j+1] + A[k, j] + A[k, j+1] + A[k+1, j] \\
A[i, j] + A[k+1, j+1] & \leq A[i, j+1] + A[k+1, j] \\
\end{split}$$

which proves the inductive step. Employing this exact same approach on the rows which shows that this statement is indeed a restatement of the definition of Monge arrays.

>***b.*** The following array is not Monge. Change one element in order to make it Monge. (*Hint*: Use part (***a.***))
>
>$$\begin{array}{c c c c}
37 & 23 & 22 & 32 \\
21 & 6 & 7 & 10 \\
53 & 34 & 30 & 31 \\
32 & 13 & 9 & 6 \\
43 & 21 & 15 & 8 \\
\end{array}$$

Let's call this array $$B$$. Part ***a*** tells us that in order for $$B$$ to be Monge, the following must be true:

$$B[i, j] + B[i + 1, j + 1] \leq B[i, j+1] + B[i+1, j] \quad \forall i = 1, 2, 3, 4 \quad \forall j = 1, 2, 3$$

(Where the bounds for $$i$$ and $$j$$ come from the size of the array). Since $$B$$ is not Monge, it must be true that this does not hold in all cases. 

$$\begin{split}
i = 1, j = 1 &: B[1, 1] + B[2, 2] \leq B[1, 2] + B[2, 1] & = 37 + 6 \leq 23 + 21 &= 43 \leq 44 \\ 
i = 1, j = 2 &: B[1, 2] + B[2, 3] \leq B[1, 3] + B[2, 2] & = 23 + 7 \leq 22 + 6 &= 30 \leq 28 \\
i = 1, j = 3 &: B[1, 3] + B[2, 4] \leq B[1, 4] + B[2, 3] & = 22 + 10 \leq 32 + 7 &= 32 \leq 39 \\
i = 2, j = 1 &: B[2, 1] + B[3, 2] \leq B[2, 2] + B[3, 1] & = 21 + 34 \leq 6 + 53 &= 55 \leq 59 \\
i = 2, j = 2 &: B[2, 2] + B[3, 3] \leq B[2, 3] + B[3, 2] & = 6 + 30 \leq 7 + 34 &= 36 \leq 41 \\
i = 2, j = 3 &: B[2, 3] + B[3, 4] \leq B[2, 4] + B[3, 3] & = 7 + 31 \leq 10 + 30 &= 38 \leq 40 \\
i = 3, j = 1 &: B[3, 1] + B[4, 2] \leq B[3, 2] + B[4, 1] & = 53 + 13 \leq 34 + 32 &= 66 \leq 66 \\
i = 3, j = 2 &: B[3, 2] + B[4, 3] \leq B[3, 3] + B[4, 2] & = 34 + 9 \leq 30 + 13 &= 43 \leq 43 \\
i = 3, j = 3 &: B[3, 3] + B[4, 4] \leq B[3, 4] + B[4, 3] & = 30 + 6 \leq 31 + 9 &= 36 \leq 40 \\
i = 4, j = 1 &: B[4, 1] + B[5, 2] \leq B[4, 2] + B[5, 1] & = 32 + 21 \leq 13 + 43 &= 53 \leq 56 \\
i = 4, j = 2 &: B[4, 2] + B[5, 3] \leq B[4, 3] + B[5, 2] & = 13 + 15 \leq 9 + 21 &= 28 \leq 30 \\
i = 4, j = 3 &: B[4, 3] + B[5, 4] \leq B[4, 4] + B[5, 3] & = 9 + 8 \leq 6 + 15 &= 17 \leq 31 \\
\end{split}$$

The case that does not hold is where $$i = 1$$ and $$j = 2$$, therefore we must change one of these terms so that this case holds. Reducing $$B[1, 2]$$ by 2 will invalidate the case where $$i = 1$$ and $$j = 1$$ so we cannot use this value. Reducing $$B[2, 3]$$ by 2 will not invalidate any cases. Thus by setting $$B[2, 3] = 5$$ this array becomes Monge.

>***c.*** Let $$f(i)$$ be the index of the column containing the leftmost minimum element of row $$i$$. Prove that $$f(1) \leq f(2) \leq \cdots \leq f(m)$$ for any $$m \times n$$ Monge array.

Suppose $$f(i) > f(i+1)$$. Based on the definition of Monge arrays, this would mean that in dealing with rows $$i$$ and $$i+1$$ and columns $$f(i)$$ and $$f(i+1)$$ the following must be true:

$$A[i, f(i+1)] + A[i+1, f(i)] \leq A[i, f(i)] + A[i + 1, f(i+1)]$$

however this contradicts the definition of the function $$f$$ which states that $$A[i, f(i+1)] > A[i, f(i)]$$ and $$A[i + 1, f(i)] \geq A[i+1, f(i+1)]$$.

>***d.*** Here is a description of a divide-and-conquer algorithm that computes the left-most minimum element in each row of an $$m \times n$$ Monge array $$A$$:
>
>Construct a submatrix $$A'$$ of $$A$$ consisting of the even-numbered rows of $$A$$. Recursively determine the leftmost minimum for each row of $$A'$$. Then compute the leftmost minimum in the odd-numbered rows of $$A$$.
>
>Explain how to compute the leftmost minimum in the odd-numbered rows of $$A$$ (given that the leftmost minimum of the even-numbered rows is known) in $$O(m + n)$$ time.

Based on the conclusion of part ***c*** we can restrict the elements which we need to examine. For each odd row $$k$$ we need only consult the elements between $$f(k-1)$$ and $$f(k+1)$$ where $$f(0) = 1$$ and $$f(m) = f(m+1) = n$$. 

The matrix has $$\lceil m / 2 \rceil$$ odd-numbered rows, and so finding the leftmost minimum of each of them takes

$$\begin{split}
\sum\limits_{k=1}^{\lceil m / 2 \rceil} (f(k+1) - f(k - 1) + 1) &= \lceil m / 2 \rceil \sum\limits_{k=1}^{\lceil m / 2 \rceil} (f(k+1) - f(k - 1) \\
&= O(m) + f(\lceil m / 2 \rceil) - f(1) \\
&= O(m + n) \\
\end{split}$$

>***e.*** Write the recurrence describing the running time of the algorithm described in part ***d***. Show that its solution is $$O(m + n \log m)$$.

$$\begin{split}
T(n) &= T(m/2) + O(m + n) \\
&= T(m/2) + am + bn \\
&= am + bn + \frac{am}{2} + bn + \frac{am}{4} + bn + \dots \\
&= \sum\limits_{i=0}^{\log m - 1} \left(\frac{am}{2^i} + bn \right) \\
&\leq \left(am \sum\limits_{i=0}^{\infty} \frac{1}{2}^i \right) + bn \log m \\
&= am \left( \frac{1}{1 - \frac{1}{2}} \right) + bn \log m \\
&= 2am +bn \log m \\
&= O(m + n \log m) \\
\end{split}$$